RFC: Else and Else-If Directives (#62)
salesforce/lwc-rfcs: text/0000-else.md

In the case of LWC, since we already have `if:else` and `if:false`, and since there is no ergonomic way to do conditional rendering in JavaScript (other than `render()`, which requires creating separate template HTML files), it would be most natural to align with the first group of frameworks.

## Detailed design

The basic design is to add three new directives:

- `elseif:true`
- `elseif:false`
- `lwc:else`

The reason for using `lwc:else` rather than just `else` is to avoid conflicts with existing attributes that may be named `else`, and to ensure that all directives have a namespace separator (`:`).

### Syntax

All three new directives must be immediately preceded by a sibling `if:true`/`if:false` (or `elseif:true`/`elseif:false`).

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<div>Yolo!</div>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

> Whitespace is ignored when considering siblinghood.

Reviewer: I would add a comment here, stating that `if:*`, `esleif:*` and `lwc:else` are mutually exclusive on the same element.

Author: Done.

#### Code comments

In the case of code comments, the behavior depends on whether `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled or not. When _not_ preserving comments, comments may appear between conditional siblings:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template>
    <template if:true={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

Whereas when `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled, comments become syntactically meaningful and therefore cannot be placed between sibling conditional directives:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:preserve-comments>
    <template if:true={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

#### Accessors

Similar to `if:true` and `if:false`, the expression passed in to `elseif:true` and `elseif:false` must use [simple dot notation](https://lwc.dev/guide/reference#if%3Atrue%7Cfalse%3D%7Bexpression%7D).

#### Attribute values

> To avoid typos (e.g. using `lwc:else` when you mean `lwc:elseif`), `lwc:else` must _not_ have an attribute value. Any attribute value is treated as a compile-time error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid typos (e.g. using `lwc:else` when you mean `elseif:true`), `lwc:else` must _not_ have an attribute value. Any attribute value is treated as a compile-time error:

```

```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template elseif:true></template>
```

### Semantics

`elseif:true` and `elseif:false` behave the same as `if:true` and `if:false` respectively, except that their behavior depends on any preceding `if:true`/`if:false`/`elseif:true`/`elseif:false` statements. Similarly, the behavior of `lwc:else` also depends on its previous siblings.

For example, in a series of sibling `if:` / `elseif:` / `else:` directives, the inverse of the previous evaluated expression determines whether we reach the next directive:

```html
<template if:true={abra}>
    Abra!
</template>
<template elseif:true={kadabra}>
    Kadabra!
</template>
<template elseif:false={hocus}>
    Pocus!
</template>
<template lwc:else>
    Kadabra!
</template>
```

Rather than rehash the basics of conditional logic in programming, let's define this as being analogous to the [`if` statement](https://262.ecma-international.org/12.0/#prod-IfStatement) (and friends) in JavaScript:

```js
if (component.abra) {
  // Abra!
} else if (component.kadabra) {
  // Kadabra!
} else if (!component.hocus) {
  // Pocus!
} else {
  // Kadabra!
}
```

Note that this means:

> 1. The property getters are only accessed once per definition in an `if:` or `ifelse:`.

Reviewer: > per definition

I understand the overall meaning of this sentence, but per definition doesn't look like the correct term here.

Author: Changed to "per instance of."

---
title: Else and Else-If Directives
status: DRAFTED
created_at: 2022
---

# Else and Else-If Directives

## Summary

> This proposal replaces and enhances the existing `if:true` and `if:else` directives to add directives that express "else" and "else if" logic.

Reviewer 2: > This proposal replaces ...

I'm surprised this is a replacement rather than deprecate and offer a better alternative. Offline I'd like to understand the rollout plan for Lightning Platform. cc @pmdartus

Reviewer: I don't think this proposal replaces the existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives. As [stated](https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/62/files#diff-2556c5c6cd88d674348a2e918cb09e69e6a8f133b8930926d945660d81f31140R262) in the _How we teach this_ section, we would mark the existing directives are legacy. I don't see us dropping support for `if:*` directives in the foreseeable future.

This sentence can certainly be rephrased to alleviate this confusion.

```suggestion
This proposal superseed the existing `if:true` and `if:else` directives to add directives that express "else" and "else if" logic.

```

----

Also on the topic of Salesforce platform enablement, I am wondering if this feature should or not be enabled by default. Should this be gated behind an API version to incentivize developers to bump their component API version's to beneficiate from this feature.

Author: Correct, it doesn't "replace" it, it supersedes it.

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif={bar}></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

#### Code comments

In the case of code comments, the behavior depends on whether `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled or not. When _not_ preserving comments, comments may appear between conditional siblings:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

Whereas when `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled, comments become syntactically meaningful and therefore cannot be placed between sibling conditional directives:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:preserve-comments>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

#### Accessors

Similar to `if:true` and `if:false`, the expression passed in to `lwc:if` and `lwc:elseif` must use [simple dot notation](https://lwc.dev/guide/reference#if%3Atrue%7Cfalse%3D%7Bexpression%7D).

> The exception is that "dot notation" is now expanded to include expressions preceded by a single `!` character, indicating negation:

Reviewer 2: `{!` is the delimeter for expressions in Salesforce: [Aura](https://developer.salesforce.com/docs/atlas.en-us.234.0.lightning.meta/lightning/expr_overview.htm), [Visualforce](https://trailhead.salesforce.com/content/learn/modules/visualforce_fundamentals/visualforce_variables_expressions#:~:text=The%20expression%20syntax%20in%20Visualforce%20is:). 

This may cause confusion. I think some user research is needed.

Reviewer: This is a good callout. On this topic, I think it is also worth adding that in all the modern JS frameworks, using the `!` token is used as the negation operator in template expressions.

It appears to me that we don't have a consensus on the template expression syntax extension proposed in this RFC. Taking a step back the introduction of the `!` operator is orthogonal to if/else proposal. I would suggest removing it from this proposal and moving the discussion to another RFC. The current lack of capability to express negation in the template makes the use of the if/else new directive less friendly since it would require developers to express the negation in JavaScript, but I think we can work on this in parallel.

Thoughts @nolanlawson @caridy?

Author: If we get rid of `!`, then we should revert https://github.com/salesforce/lwc-rfcs/pull/62/commits/0639cea2cb6f87db8241613e5f215f25ab129c67 and go back to the `elseif:true` / `elseif:false` / `lwc:if` system.

**Pros:** No need for the `!` in expressions. We can reuse the existing `if:true` / `if:false` rather than deprecating them.

**Cons:** The new system is less internally consistent compared to everything being prefixed with `lwc:`.

I am fine either way. Internal consistency is not everything. 🙂

Author: We could also rename `lwc:else` to `else:render`. Maybe this would look a bit more consistent:

```html
<template if:true={foo}></template>
<template elseif:true={bar}></template>
<template else:render></template>
```

We can also bikeshed on the name. (`else:do`? `else:show`?)

Author: Just chatted with @pmdartus ; we have a new proposal:

1. Get rid of the `!`
2. Keep `lwc:if` / `lwc:elseif` / `lwc:else`
3. Move the discussion about complex expressions (including `!`) to a future proposal

The benefit is that we can unblock this proposal for the time being, and consider complex expression syntax later.

```

#### Code comments

In the case of code comments, the behavior depends on whether `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled or not. When _not_ preserving comments, comments may appear between conditional siblings:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

Whereas when `lwc:preserve-comments` is enabled, comments become syntactically meaningful and therefore cannot be placed between sibling conditional directives:

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:preserve-comments>
    <template lwc:if={foo}></template>
    <!-- Comment! -->
    <template lwc:else></template>
</template>
```

#### Accessors

Similar to `if:true` and `if:false`, the expression passed in to `lwc:if` and `lwc:elseif` must use [simple dot notation](https://lwc.dev/guide/reference#if%3Atrue%7Cfalse%3D%7Bexpression%7D).

More complex expressions (e.g. `!foo`, `foo?.bar?.baz`, or `foo % 2 === 1`) are currently not supported.

#### Slots

A developer may want to use if/else-if/else chains to render a `<slot>`:

```html
<template>
    <template lwc:if={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>

>     <template lwc:else={foo}>

Reviewer 3: Should remove the attribute value here

Author: ```suggestion
    <template lwc:else>
```

        <slot></slot>
    </template>
</template>
```

In this case, the template compiler should _not_ warn about duplicate slots with the same name. This is a perfectly valid use case, and the template compiler knows for certain that the `<slot>` will not be rendered twice.

You might contrast this with the equivalent code in `if:true` / `if:false`:

```html
<template>
    <template if:true={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>

>     <template if:false={foo}>

Reviewer 3: Should remove the attribute value here

    <template if:false={foo}>
        <slot></slot>
    </template>
</template>
```

Today, the template compiler _does_ warn about duplicate slots for this case. But this actually makes sense, because the compiler cannot be certain that the `<slot>` will only render once. (For instance, the `foo` getter may have an inconsistent return value, returning `true` the first time and `false` the second time.)

#### Attribute values

To avoid typos (e.g. using `lwc:else` when you mean `lwc:elseif`), `lwc:else` must _not_ have an attribute value. Any attribute value is treated as a compile-time error:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:else={yolo}></template>
```

Similarly, `lwc:if` and `lwc:elseif` _must_ have an expression as their value:

```html
<!-- Valid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif={bar}></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if="foo"></template>
<template lwc:elseif="bar"></template>
```

```html
<!-- Invalid -->
<template lwc:if={foo}></template>
<template lwc:elseif></template>
```

### Semantics

> `lwc:if` behaves the same as `if:true`, except that it also supports an initial `!` in the expression.
> 
> `lwc:elseif` behaves the same as `lwc:if`, except that its behavior depends on any preceding `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`lwc:if` behaves the same as `if:true`. `lwc:elseif` behaves the same as `lwc:if`, except that its behavior depends on any preceding `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif` statements.

```

1. The property getters are only accessed once per instance of an `lwc:if` or `lwc:ifelse`.
2. Property getter access is determined by the ordering. In the above case, if `component.abra` is truthy, then none of the other property getters will be accessed.

## Drawbacks

This implementation would require the template parser to have knowledge of sibling nodes, rather than treating each sibling node independently.

This implementation would also supersede the existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives, which may lead to some confusion for developers.

## Alternatives

The impact of _not_ doing this is that it's much trickier to do conditional logic in LWC templates.

## Adoption strategy

This is a non-breaking change, so users can opt-in as they see fit.

# How we teach this

This feature is very similar to the same concept in other frameworks (Vue, Svelte, Angular, etc.). It's also similar to `if` and `else` in JavaScript. So we can leverage that familiarity when teaching this.

As for the existing `if:true` and `if:else` statements, we will need to mark them as "legacy," since they are rendered redundant by the new `lwc:if`. To ease the transition, we can provide:

> 1. ESLint rules to warn about using `if:true` and `if:else`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make the template compiler warn about using `if:true` and `if:else`.
```

ESLint doesn't run against template code. I would suggest adding making the template compiler warn. We can create an HTML parser for ESLint but it would require a lot more work.

2. Codemods to transform code that uses `if:true` to the equivalent `lwc:if` usages instead. It should be possible for this codemod to be consistent and non-destructive. (`if:false` is not so easy to replace, but it may be possible with a future, more complex expression syntax.) It may also be possible to replace an `if:true={foo}`/`if:false={foo}` chain with the equivalent `lwc:if`/`lwc:else` chain, but this is not 100% semantically equivalent (due to the number of accessor calls), and would be trickier to implement.

# Unresolved questions

> The existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives work on arbitrary elements, not just `<template>`s. Should `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif`/`lwc:else` work the same way?

Reviewer: > The existing `if:true` and `if:false` directives work on arbitrary elements, not just `<template>`s. Should `lwc:if`/`lwc:elseif`/`lwc:else` work the same way?

I would say yes. This avoids adding a `<template>` tag especially if the condition only applies to a single element on each branch.
